Small fixes and an error explanation (#51)
au-cru/site: content/material/2020-01-17-intermediate-dplyr.Rmd

Let's consider the `population_wide` dataframe that we just created as the starting point. 
Let's say that we want to reshape this data to a format in which all countries are listed under a single variable, e.g. `country_name`, and the population data are listed under a variable called `population_data`. For this operation, we need to use the function `pivot_longer()`

In this case, we want to specify:
- the argument `names_to`: the name of the new variable under which we want to group our columns, 
- the argument `values_to`: the name of the new variable under which we want to group the values of our variables.

We run this function...

```{r}
population_wide %>%
  pivot_longer(names_to = "Country", values_to = "Population")
```

... but we get an error message!

This is because we did not specify which columns to shift into a long format.

  > In `pivot_wider()`, if no argument is given to `id_cols` it defaults to select all columns. However, `pivot_longer` has no default for `cols`, and will throw an error if no argument is given.

We could select every column, with the tidyselect function `everything()`. This is not what want (..., but you should try it to see why!). 

> 

Reviewer: Hi Johannes, great idea! 
Maybe we can add a code chunk were we give and example on how to use the function everything().
I think it would be helpful

Reviewer 2: Great, i added it in 117a1de

---
title: "2020-01-19-intermediate-dplyr"
author: 
- "Sara Tomiolo"
- "Luke Johnston"

> 

Reviewer 3: You'll have to update the file by synching with this branch (pull from "upstream" aka the main repo if you are familiar with doing that. If not, let me know)

date: "1/17/2020"
description: >

>   Learn to reshape data in long or wide form, manage factors and dates using the packages dplyr, tidyr, lubridate, forcats and stringr.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Learn to reshape data in long or wide form and dates using the packages dplyr, tidyr, and lubridate.
```

Reviewer 3: @JohannesNE you can add these suggestions directly by using the button "Add suggestion to batch" or "Commit suggestion".

categories:
  - Intermediate
  - R
  - Code-along
tags:
  - tidyr
  - dplyr
  - lubridate
  - data manipulation
  - dates
---

```{r setup, echo=FALSE}
source(here::here("R/utils-for-content.R"))
```

## Preparation

Please install the tidyverse package:

```{r, eval=FALSE}
install.packages("tidyverse")
library(tidyverse)
library(lubridate)
```

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

> In this lesson, we assume a bit of familiarity with the basic functions of dplyr (especially `group_by()` and `summarize()`), which we covered in the [intro_dplyr lesson](https://au-cru.github.io/site/material/2019-11-15-intro-dplyr/) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this lesson, we assume a bit of familiarity with the basic functions of dplyr (especially `group_by()` and `summarize()`), which we covered in the [intro dplyr lesson](https://au-cru.github.io/site/material/2019-11-15-intro-dplyr/) 
```

> ### Objectives

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Objectives
```

> 1. To learn to restructure your data between long and wide format with 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. To know how to apply the `pivot_wider()` and `pivot_longer()` tidyr functions to restructure your data between long and wide formats (and vice versa). 
```

> `pivot_longer()` and `pivot_wider()` functions from tidyr package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> 2. Learn to combine `group_by()` and `summarize()` function with `pivot_longer()` and `pivot_wider()` functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. To use the `group_by()` and `summarize()` dplyr functions with the `pivot_longer()` and `pivot_wider()` functions to apply more powerful and useful wrangling techniques to your skills.
```

> 3. Manage dates with lubridate functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. To apply common lubridate functions to easily wrangle pesky date variables.
```

    
**At the end of this session you will be able:**

1. To re-structure your data in long or wide format.
2. To reshape data by using grouping, summarizing and reshaping dataframes.

> 3. To reformat dates with lubridate

Reviewer 3: Let's just delete these lines.

> ### Why learning to reformat and reshape data?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Why learning to reformat and reshape data?
```

Often we receive databases that have been created by others, and in which information is organized in a "messy" way. Some other times, we simply need to reorder the structure of the data to be able to carry out certain data analysis or data visualization that require a specific data structure. 

> The tidyverse, provides some very powerful packages (e.g. dplyr, tidyr) that can allow for complete reorganization of our data in a few lines of codes. Using these packages and their functions have several advantages:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The tidyverse provides some very powerful packages (e.g. dplyr, tidyr) that can allow for complete reorganization of our data in a few lines of codes. Using these packages and their functions have several advantages:
```

- It makes our lives easier and our work faster because we can jump between different 
formats of our data in an agile and easy-to-track way;

- It makes our work reproducible.

### Wide and long formats

One of the most common operations that we may need to do is to change the way our data is organized from a long (few columns, many rows) to a wide (few rows, many columns) format.

The illustrations below shows how the same information can be represented in a long and a wide format. Notice that the value (a-f) of each variable/key (x,y,z) can be read for each id (1, 2) in both formats.

> ![](https://github.com/gadenbuie/tidyexplain/raw/master/images/static/png/original-dfs-tidy.png)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Img: https://github.com/gadenbuie/tidyexplain](https://github.com/gadenbuie/tidyexplain/raw/master/images/static/png/original-dfs-tidy.png)
```

> *Img: https://github.com/gadenbuie/tidyexplain*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> The functions we want to use for these operations are `pivot_longer()` and `pivot_wider()` from the tidyr package (Those of you already familiar with this package may know these functions as `spread()` and `gather()`. Although these two functions still work, they are being slowly replaced by the `pivot_**` functions).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The functions we want to use for these operations are `pivot_longer()` and `pivot_wider()` from the tidyr package. Those of you already familiar with this package may know the older functions as `spread()` and `gather()`. Although these two functions still work, they are being slowly replaced by the `pivot_**` functions.
```

To show how these functions work, we are going to use the built-in dataframe `population`.

> #### Familiarize with the dataframe

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Familiarize ourselves with the dataframe
```

Using the function `View()` inspect the dataframe population, which shows the population census in different countries across multiple years.

We are going to load tidyverse

```{r}
library(tidyverse)
```

```{r}
View(population)
```

> ### `Pivot_wider()`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `pivot_wider()`: From long to wide
```

Say that we want to explore how the population varies across years in each country. 
To do this we may want to show each single country as a separate variable (i.e. column). 

This requires reshaping the data so that each single country now listed under the variable `country` 
becomes an individual variable (i.e. column), under which the population numbers, 
now listed under the variable `population`, are listed.

To do so, we will use the function `pivot_wider()` because we want to create 
a wider dataframe with more columns (the single countries), and fewer rows.

We will call this new dataframe `population_wide`.
In the function `pivot_wider()` we want to specify three arguments: 

- the dataframe to work on,
- the argument `names_from`: where we indicate the name of the "long" variable that we will use to create the new "wide" variables 
- the argument `values_from`: the values that we will use to fill the rows of the new variable we created

```{r}
population_wide <- 

>   pivot_wider(population, names_from = country, values_from = population) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  pivot_wider(population, names_from = country, values_from = population)
population_wide
```

```

We can run the exact same operation taking advantage of the pipe operator `%>%`
that we showed in the intro session. If the memory is foggy, imagine this operator as an
arrow that connects consecutive functions in a smooth way. 

When using the pipe operator we are indicating that the functions will be applied to the 
dataframe `population`, so we do not need to indicate that into the `pivot_wider()` function arguments.

```{r}
population_wide <- population %>% 

>   pivot_wider(names_from = country, values_from = population) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  pivot_wider(names_from = country, values_from = population) 
population_wide
```

```

#### Exercise 1
Use the dataframe `us_rent_income` for this exercise. This dataframe shows the estimated value and the 90%
margin of error for yearly income and monthly rent of each state in the US.

In this case, you want to display the data in wide form to see how estimated income varies across states.
To do so, each state will become a variable (i.e. column) to which the estimated income will be associated

```{r, eval FALSE}
us_income_wide <- us_rent_income %>% 

>   #because we are only interested in income and not in rent, we will extract the variable of interest from our database

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # We are only interested in income and not in rent, so we will extract these variables of interest from our database
```

  filter(variable == "income") %>% 

>   #we select only the variables of interest to remain in our dataframe

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # We select only the variables of interest to remain in our dataframe
```

  select(NAME, variable, estimate) %>% 

>   pivot_wider(names_from = ______, values_from = _____)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  pivot_wider(names_from = ______, values_from = _____)
us_income_wide
```

```

> ### `Pivot_longer()`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `pivot_longer()`: From wide to long
```

We can also do the opposite: a shift from a dataframe in wide format to a dataframe in long format. 
Let's consider the `population_wide` dataframe that we just created as the starting point. 

> Let's say that we want to reshape this data to a format in which all countries are listed under a single variable, e.g. `country_name`, and the population data are listed under a variable called `population_data`. For this operation, we need to use the function `pivot_longer()`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's say that we want to reshape this data to a format in which all countries are listed under a single variable, e.g. `country_name`, and the population data are listed under a variable called `population_data`. For this operation, we need to use the function `pivot_longer()`.
```

> In this case, we want to specify:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case, we want to specify:

```

Reviewer 3: Needs a new line for the list to render properly

- the argument `names_to`: the name of the new variable under which we want to group our columns, 
- the argument `values_to`: the name of the new variable under which we want to group the values of our variables.

We run this function...

```{r}
population_wide %>%
  pivot_longer(names_to = "Country", values_to = "Population")
```

... but we get an error message!

This is because we did not specify which columns to shift into a long format.

  > In `pivot_wider()`, if no argument is given to `id_cols` it defaults to select all columns. However, `pivot_longer` has no default for `cols`, and will throw an error if no argument is given.

> We could select every column, with the [tidyselect](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/transform.html#select) helper function `everything()`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We could select every column, with the [tidyselect](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/transform.html#select) helper function `everything()`. This function tells `pivot_longer()` to use all the columns in the dataset when converting to long form.
```

```{r}
population_wide %>%
  pivot_longer(everything(), names_to = "Country", values_to = "Population")
```

> This breaks the row-wise relation between year and population, and is clearly not what we are want. Instead, we specify that the variable `year` is not to be involved in the reshaping. Columns not involved in the reshape will be copied, to preserve the row-wise relations in the data. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This breaks the row-wise relation between year and population, and is clearly not what we want. Instead, we specify that the variable `year` is not to be involved in the reshaping. Columns not involved in the reshape will be copied, to preserve the row-wise relations in the data. 
```

```{r}
population_wide %>%
  pivot_longer(-year, names_to = "country_name", values_to = "population_data")
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

We use the `-` here for `year` to tell `pivot_longer()` to *not* include (to *exclude*) the column `year` from being converted to long form.
```

**Notice that** in the function `pivot_longer()` the arguments `names_to` and `values_to` require "" because we are providing names of variables that need to be created. 
Instead, in the function `pivot_wider()` we are giving the arguments `names_from` and `values_from` variables that already exist, hence  the "" are not needed.

> #### Exercise

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Exercise 2
```

We will use again the `us_rent_income` dataframe for this exercise.
In this case we want the values of `estimate` and `moe` to be stacked in one single column called `value`, 
while the respective categories of `estimate` and `moe` should be described in a variable called `calculation`

```{r, eval = FALSE}
us_rent_income_long <- us_rent_income %>% 

>   #this variable is a nuisance and is not giving information useful to us, so we remove it 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # this variable is a nuisance and is not giving information useful to us, so we will remove it 
```

  select(-GEOID) %>% 

>   #remember that the variable that will not be reshaped need to be omitted using the operator -

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # Recall that the to exclude a variable from reshaping, you use `-` (minus symbol).
```

>   #when there is more than one variable to omit, we combined the operators - with c()

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # When we want to indicate multiple variables, we can combine them with `c()`.
```

>   pivot_longer(-c(______, ______), names_to = ________, values_to = _________)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  pivot_longer(-c(______, ______), names_to = ________, values_to = _________)
us_rent_income_long
```

```

> ### Use `pivot_**` functions in combination with `group_by()` and `summarize()` functions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `pivot_**` with `group_by()` and `summarize()`
```

For this example we are going to use the built-in dataframe `storms`

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Once again, explore the data using the function `View()`

> ```{r}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```{r, eval=FALSE}
```

View(storms)
```

In this dataframe, information about storms are classified  in long format. 
Storms are categorized across years and information on wind, latitude, longitude and pressure 
are presented as columns.

Let's say that we want to see how mean wind speed vary across 
different storms (name and status) and across years. 

This means that we want to apply the function `pivot_longer()` to visualize each storm name as a separate variable.

However, before reshaping the dataframe in long form, we need to do some extra work. 
Take another look at the `storms` dataframe. Variables are measured multiple times within each year. 
So if we want to have a mean value of wind speed for each year, we need to use the functions `group_by()` and `summarize()` that we showed in the intro session. 

> We are going to call this new dataframe `storm_wide`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are going to call this new dataframe `storm_wide`.
```

First we will calculate the mean value of wind speed for each storm, across years 

> and discriminating across storm status

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and discriminating across storm status:
```

```{r}
storms_wide <- storms %>% 

>   #first we select the variable of interest to avoid an overcrowded dataframe

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # First we select the variables we are most interested in
```

  select(name, year, wind, status) %>% 

>   #second we tell R according to which criteria we want to summarize our data, i.e. we want to know the mean value of wind speed for each storm according to storm status and year

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  # Next, we tell R how we want to summarize our data, i.e. we want
  # to know the mean wind speed for each storm by storm status and year
```

  group_by(name, year, status) %>% 
  summarize(mean_wind = mean(wind)) 
```

> Now we can reshape the data into a wide format 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we can reshape the data into a wide format:
```

```{r}
storms_wide <- storms_wide %>% 
   pivot_wider(names_from = name, values_from = mean_wind)  

> ```

Reviewer 2: This example is a bit unintuitive, as the resulting wide table is very large, and contains mostly NA (for every storm that was not present in a given year).

Reviewer 3: You have any suggestions to improve it?

> #### Exercise

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Exercise 3
```

Using the dataframe `us_rent_income` use the functions `group_by()` and `summarize()` in combination with

> `pivot_longer()`, `pivot_wider()` to reshape a database in which different values of cut correspond to mean values of x, y, z (tip: you need to use both pivot_longer and pivot_wider!)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`pivot_longer()`, `pivot_wider()` to reshape a database in which different values of cut correspond to mean values of x, y, z (tip: you need to use both `pivot_longer()` and `pivot_wider()`!).
```

The reshaped dataframe should look like this:

```{r, echo = FALSE}
diamonds_means <- diamonds %>% 
  select(cut, x, y, z) %>% 
  group_by(cut) %>% 
  summarize(x_mean = mean(x),
            y_mean = mean(y),
            z_mean = mean(z))

diamonds_long <- diamonds_means %>% 
  pivot_longer(-cut, names_to = "coordinate", values_to = "mean_coord")

diamonds_wide <-  diamonds_long %>% 
    pivot_wider(names_from = cut, values_from = mean_coord)
  
diamonds_wide
```

```{r, eval = FALSE}
diamonds_means <- diamonds %>% 
  select(cut, x, y, z) %>% 
  group_by(___) %>% 
  summarize(x_mean = ____,
            y_mean = ____,
            z_mean = ____)

diamonds_reshaped <- diamonds_means %>% 
  pivot_ ______(____, names_ ___ = __________, values_ ___ = ___________) %>% 
  pivot_ ________(names_ ____ = ________, values_ ____ = __________)
  

> diamonds_reshaped

Reviewer 3: The exercise is not synched with the text for the exercise.

```

> ### Handle dates with lubridate

Reviewer 3: We could even put this as an optional section, since the wrangling may actually take a while to go through and explain. (I know for me this ong-wide, wide-long conversion took a while to sink in and conceptualize).

Often enough, data are collected on the same subjects (in this case storm names) across time, this implied the use of dates. However, handling dates can become a bit of a headache if R does not recognize the format. 

> The package lubridate helps specifically with this problem and allows to format dates in a way that can be unequivocally recognized by R.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The package lubridate helps specifically with this problem and allows you format dates in a way that can be unequivocally recognized by R.
```

Although lubridate is part of the tidyverse (and we do not need to install it separately), we need to call it separately because it does not get loaded when we load the tidyverse library.

```{r}
library(lubridate)
```

> The best way to input dates (if you are the one doing the data input), is to create three separate columns for day, month, year.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The best way to input dates (if you are the one doing the data input), is to create three separate columns for day, month, and year.
```

> Then we can use the function `ymd()` from the package lubridate in combination with the function `paste()` to create a date variable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then we can use the function `ymd()` (for "year", "month", "day") from the package lubridate in combination with the function `paste()` to create a date variable:
```

```{r}
storms_with_date <- storms %>% 

>   mutate(date = ymd(paste(year, month, day, sep = "-") )) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  mutate(date = ymd(paste(year, month, day, sep = "-"))) 
storms_with_date
```

```

> if you query the new dataframe using the function `View()` you can see that the new variable date is specifically formatted as a Date data type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you query the new dataframe using the function `View()` you can see that the new variable date is specifically formatted as a Date data type.
```

```{r}
str(storms_with_date)
```

> # Extra: Tidying messing data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Extra: Tidying messing data
```

Reviewer 3: We could move this up and replace with the lubridate section. Then later have a session on lubridate and stringr or something.

Reviewer 3: I like this section. You should definitely do it at the end of the session to show off how powerful the pivot functions are.

Reviewer 2: Moved in section in df6cbb5653462c38561065d3fc78e5de4ec4ec3b

> So far, we have only reshaped "clean" datasets, but at major usecase for the `pivot_**` functions is tidying up messy data. In the example below, we will tidy a made up (but very realistic) table.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So far, we have only reshaped "clean" datasets, but a major use case for the `pivot_**` functions is tidying up messy data. In the example below, we will tidy a made up (but very realistic) table.
```

```{r}
blood_pressure <- tibble(
  id = 1:3, 
  bp_Sys_week1 = rnorm(3, 130, 5), bp_Dia_week1 = rnorm(3, 90, 5), weight_week1 = rnorm(3, 80, 10),
  bp_Sys_week2 = rnorm(3, 130, 5), bp_Dia_week2 = rnorm(3, 90, 5), weight_week2 = weight_week1 + rnorm(3),
  bp_Sys_week3 = rnorm(3, 130, 5), bp_Dia_week3 = rnorm(3, 90, 5), weight_week3 = weight_week2 + rnorm(3)
)

blood_pressure

```

> The main problem in this table is that the variable names also inclue a value (week number). We want to pivot this wide dataframe into a longer one, with each row containg an id, a week number, a systolic and a diastolic blood pressure and a weigth. For this we use `pivot_longer()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The main problem in this dataset is that the variable names also include data (week number). We want to pivot this wide dataframe into a longer one, with each row containg an id, a week number, a systolic and a diastolic blood pressure and a weight. For this we use `pivot_longer()`.
```

> We do not want to include `id` in the reshape, so we select every column except this with `-id` as the first argument. We then seperate the variable names (e.g. 'bp_Dia_week1') into the actual variable name ( 'bp_Dia') and the value of the week variable ('1'). This is donw by setting the `names_sep` parameter to the string that seperates the variable name from the week value (here '_week'). Because we split each variable name into two, we must set `names_to` for both. We do this with the character vector `c('.value', 'week')`. The special value `'.value'` indicates that the corresponding substring of the original variable name will itself become a variable name for the values in the new dataframe (This makes a lot more sense when you look at the output of the function). The parameter `names_ptypes` convertes the variable `week` from a character to an integer.

Reviewer 2: I'm not too proud of this formulations, but I think it is a very important use case for the pivot functions. Generally pivoting is an abstraction that is very hard to explain, but quite quickly becomes second nature.

> We do not want to include `id` in the reshape, so we select every column except this with `-id` as the first argument. We then seperate the variable names (e.g. 'bp_Dia_week1') into the actual variable name ( 'bp_Dia') and the value of the week variable ('1'). This is donw by setting the `names_sep` parameter to the string that seperates the variable name from the week value (here '_week'). Because we split each variable name into two, we must set `names_to` for both. We do this with the character vector `c('.value', 'week')`. The special value `'.value'` indicates that the corresponding substring of the original variable name will itself become a variable name for the values in the new dataframe (This makes a lot more sense when you look at the output of the function). The parameter `names_ptypes` convertes the variable `week` from a character to an integer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We do not want to include `id` in the reshape, so we select every column except this with `-id` as the first argument.
We then separate the variable names (e.g. 'bp_Dia_week1') into the actual variable name ('bp_Dia') and the value of the week variable ('1'). 

This is done by setting the `names_sep` parameter to the string that seperates the variable name from the week value (here '_week'). 
Because we split each variable name into two, we must set `names_to` for both. We do this with the character vector `c('.value', 'week')`. 
The special value `'.value'` indicates that the corresponding substring of the original variable name will itself become a variable name for the values in the new dataframe.
This makes a lot more sense when you look at the output of the function. 
The parameter `names_ptypes` converts the variable `week` from a character to an integer.
```

```{r}
blood_pressure_long <- blood_pressure %>% 

>   pivot_longer(-id, names_sep = '_week', names_to = c('.value', 'week'), names_ptypes = list(week = integer()))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  pivot_longer(
    -id, 
    names_sep = '_week', 
    names_to = c('.value', 'week'), 
    names_ptypes = list(week = integer())
  )
```

blood_pressure_long
```

> In some cases you may want only on column with blood pressures, and a seperate column indicating if the pressue is diastolic or systolic. We could pivot our `blood_pressure_long` even longer, but for the sake of demonstration, we will do it in one function call. As `weight` cannot be seperated in diastolic and systolic, we will first exclude this variable. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some cases you may want only one column with blood pressures, and a separate column indicating if the pressure is diastolic or systolic. 
We could pivot our `blood_pressure_long` even longer, but for the sake of demonstration, we will do it in one function call. 
Since `weight` cannot be separated in diastolic and systolic, we will first exclude this variable. 
```
